Thanks so much for the introduction. Uh
let's get into it.
There's a star and a star and a
dangerous gravity.
>> Test watcher for you for Iris.
>> Let's follow through with it and see
what happens.
So,
What was that? Um, what did we just
witness? That was technically three
deaths in three different games. Death
Stranding to On the Beach, A Thousand
Times Resist, and Small Void. Except
these deaths aren't really deaths.
They're timetraveling mini games.
They're cosmic events, and
paradoxically, they're even winning. In
these games, the meaning of death is
stretched out, becoming porous and
malleable. A metaphor for survival
strategies postecological ruination, a
processing engine for political trauma,
an embodied experience of cosmic
evolution.
Each of these video games was made in
the last two years and each one in its
own way points towards new approaches to
handling death in games. Not as an end
of the road scenario, but instead as a
demand for more life.
In queer game studies, this approach has
been termed permal life or persistent
life.
at a forum on maxing persistence is
obviously a running theme.
So in this talk I wanted to ask once the
fear of death and the desire to win are
removed from video games, what else is
the medium capable of?
I could talk about death in video games
forever, but here I don't have so much
time.
So, let's start by zooming out. What
does it mean to die in a video game? In
most games, to die is to fail, and to
fail is to lose. Loss of inventory, loss
of progress, loss of world.
Most games cushion or fall with the
ultimate forgiveness mechanic, the
return to last save point. simply
respawn and continue onward as if
nothing ever happened.
With one-click resurrections that go
against the laws of physics, dying in
video games has become so
inconsequential, so blasze.
But it wasn't always this way. If you
think back to the first commercially
available video games, which were arcade
games, arcade games stored all their
data on ROM chips, which didn't have the
memory capacity for saving player
progress.
The ephemeral nature of success was a
core economic feature, encouraging
players to insert more coins and to
restart the game.
The history of early arcade games is
basically just the history of how to die
more slowly.
This languid flattening of death into
yet another gamified condition is what
the game scholar Yesesper Ule
investigated in the art of failure, one
of the very first critical texts on the
effective capacities of video games.
In games, we seek out the unpleasantness
and the tragedy of losing and of dying,
even though we actively avoid these in
real life. He reflects,
"Games promise us that we can repair a
personal inadequacy,
an inadequacy that games themselves
produced in us in the first place.
When death got gamified, then so did
life its opposite.
Scholars like Ian Bogos hyped up the
gamification narrative, translating it
into an easy touch point for the
neoliberal subject under latestage
capitalism.
Personally, I'm much more interested in
what Mackenzie Walk had to say in her
text, Gamer Theory.
Games are no longer a pastime outside or
alongside of life. Warark muses. They
are now the very form of life and death
and time itself. She says
in other words, everything is game and
game is world.
If we were to follow Yule and War's
logic, it's possible to see how games
can declaw our guttural reaction against
loss, failure, and death, simply by
getting us used to these feelings. In
game space, loss of life can become so
normalized that it appears harmless,
even ridiculous.
This can produce some pretty weird
feelings. what I like to call bad
affect, where actions or conditions
typically associated with pain, grief,
and loss can become pleasurable, even
fun.
Take Elden Ring for instance, a game
that makes a punchline out of the nearly
infinite ways a player can die, or its
spiritual predecessor, Dark Souls 2, an
RPG title seemingly built for
massochists.
In Dark Souls II online multiplayer
hellscape, 42 players die every second.
A live in-game counter clocked 500
million worldwide player deaths in 2022.
The average player will die thousands of
times throughout the course of gameplay.
Loving feeling bad in the infinite death
simulator. As expected, the queer
theorists have had a field day with this
one. No fun gaming, difficult gaming,
bad game feel. These are all
terminologies coming out of queer game
studies in the last few years. Of
course, stemming from the work of Jack
Halberstam, Sarah Ahmad, and Lauren
Berlant.
bleeding into game space and mingling
with the ecological and social theories.
These ideas have cultivated a new genre
of games whose goal is to revel in
failure, to pick it apart and explore
its many lessons.
As game scholars like Aubrey Annabelle
and Alenda Chang have laid out in recent
writings, playing with feelings and
playing nature. Failure in games can
also traverse many scales and systems.
Rather than a burden to be experienced
only by the playable character, failure
can extend to the collapse of an entire
system, political, economic, ecological.
And these kinds of failures can be
highly generative, showing us that
another world is possible.
Games addressing failure and death
systematically demand a radical change
of perspective.
They are questioning so much. Our
identity, intimacy, and value systems,
the damage humans have done to the
environment and the possibility of a
less extractive future.
Therefore, it's kind of unsurprising
that the mechanics of these games needs
to be kept extremely simple in order for
the deep thinking to be deeply felt.
Walking simulators, a type of video game
where the primary mechanic is simply to
walk, are a popular carrier back carrier
bag for such dense existential
narratives.
Deceptively simple, all three of the
games that I want to talk about today
draw on the walking simulator genre to
induce new ideas on death, failure,
identity, who gets to live, and how we
remember.
First up, Death Stranding.
Death Stranding is a world between
worlds. That of the dead and that of the
living. Climate capitalism and climate
meltdown. The crumbling of the American
empire and the dogged, delirious brand
of American exceptionalism that's
responsible for so much of our present
political and ecological turmoil.
The game designer Kojima's world is
reality adjacent.
As a nod to the speculative fiction
tactics of authors like Octavia Butler
and Ursula Leguin, Death Stranding
leverages future fictions to critique
political, economic, and social systems
close to home.
Death Stranding's brand of speculative
fiction is essentially gig work in the
apocalypse.
You play as Sam Porter Brides, a complex
character whose immortality sees him
running around a near future US
wasteland populated by antimatter
zombies, delivering packages and helping
to resurrect the US-based Chairo
network, which is kind of like a proto
internet, but also the ultimate
surveillance technology.
If Death Stranding one focused on the
US's own internal political meltdown,
then Death Stranding 2, released in
2025, focuses on its global impact.
In fact, the parallels between Death
Stranding and real life runs so hot.
There's MAGA meta language, monstrous
border and immigration politics, rampant
AI anxiety that some of the games more
complex mechanics fly under the radar.
One of my favorites of these mechanics
is voidouts.
Voidouts occur when a boss level version
of the affforementioned antimatter
zombie known in game as a beed thing or
a BT grabs Sam, pulls him under and
triggers an explosive event.
This will kill Sam,
but not really.
As a repatriate, Sam can respawn as many
times as he likes, complete with a
creepy cut sequence where we come to
face to face with his infant self.
But the area where Sam dies will now be
a gigantic crater marked with a equally
gigantic handprint, everything inside of
it permanently gone.
Death Stranding uses theoretical physics
as a metaphor for climate breakdown. The
strand connecting the realms of the
living and the dead, the playable
character and the environment they play
through also cross scales from the
individual to the planetary.
In 2024, the Vancouver-based game studio
Sunset Visitor released its debut title,
1,00 Times Resist.
This heady apocalyptic sci-fi story
revolves around a cast of almost
identical clones who live in an
underwater society a thousand years into
the future after every human was wiped
out by a mysterious brand of
traumainoving aliens called the
Occupants.
But the game is also simultaneously
about the 2019 to 2020 Hong Kong
protests, the complexities of
intergenerational trauma, and the
fallibility of political memory.
In the game, you play as Watcher and
then Blue, two such clones who stem from
a kind of mother tree character, a
17-year-old girl called Iris.
Iris's parents fled from Hong Kong to
Vancouver in 2019 to escape political
persecution.
Iris was the only human to survive the
occupants arrival by joining forces with
them.
Like the scrambling effect of trauma
itself, the game's narrative is
nonlinear.
Players can hop between timelines and
POVs during crucial events called
communions.
Communions are both an inner species
communication event and a kind of trauma
processing engine.
Flinging my playable character, Watcher,
across timelines, I become acutely aware
of an alien to human meta dialogue, not
of words, but of an embodied experience
that transcends language.
Communions also enable Iris, who has
rebranded herself as the allmother, the
god of a brave new world, to work
through her own tangled memory, which is
impossible to sever from the diasporic
memory of her parents, which is then
passed on to her clones.
Death and violence riddles the game, but
it operates with a kind ofworked
intelligence that could be likened to a
mcelial network.
Clones die all the time, but there's a
larger persistent behavior that builds
in the game's timeline. To borrow a
phrase from the occupants, a you that
remains and remains and remains.
This mirrors the character's own
resistance which mirrors the resistance
of the protest movements that inspired
it.
A thousand times Resist is a game for a
post209 Hong Kong protest generation of
diaspora children that doesn't exist
yet, suggested one critic of the game.
A thousand times resist teaches us about
the persistence of memory, what to hold
on to, and ultimately when it's time to
let go.
Finally, Small Void. Small Void is a
video game I made while in residence at
CERN in 2024, the European Center for
Nuclear Research in Geneva.
At the time, I was really interested in
states of being that defy binary
categories, and I love how lychans and
black holes do this across scales.
Thinking about gaming as an affective
interface to explore complex systems and
the limits of human knowledge. I was
also inspired by the knowledge vanguard
type of video game where a narrative is
not superimposed upon the player but
rather they must come to their own
conclusions.
Working together with physicists at CERN
studying quantum effects inside black
holes, I devised a two-player video game
based on Stephen Hawkings radiation
paradox.
This paradox is basically a scenario
where a particle splits in two on the
edge of a black hole.
One half falls in and the other is
ejected back out into space. This loss
of matter eventually causes the black
hole to evaporate. or die.
The game's two main levels, a volcanic
landscape and a dark forest, are
scaleless, fractals, disorient,
extremely disorienting to move through,
caught somewhere between living and
dead.
The characters that you play as,
meanwhile, are sculpted with the 3D
scans of lychans that I gathered on the
CERN campus.
So in both the playable characters and
the landscape, the borders between
subject and environment are dissolving
constantly.
Embodying these split particles of
matter and antimatter, the two players
must find each other in a game of cosmic
hideand seek.
In fact, I describe the video game as a
queer dating simulator that explores the
expansions and frictions of identity
that quantum states and human
relationships both induce.
When I was making the game, I was
thinking a lot about the limits of
language in relationships as well as
other ways of sensing the world and each
other that go beyond language.
The two primary mechanics of the video
game are echolocation or listening and
haptic feedback depending on which level
you're in.
So what's the ultimate goal of the game?
Essentially, it's to reanihilate in a
merging event, an explosive reming of
matter and antimatter particles that
have split.
Paradoxically, the death of the player
character is an expansion of the
universe itself.
This is actually based on a origin of
the universe theory I encountered at
CERN by a theoretical physicist named
Lee Small which is called cosmological
evolutionary theory
which essentially explains how the
universe expanded the way it did.
Lee believed that the simultaneous death
of billions of micro black holes right
after the big bang helped matter radiate
across the universe and enabled the you
and the mi that exist here now. So
really, if you think about death in this
sense, it's truly not an ending. It's a
state change and a layering, a
scaffolding for future life to come.
As I'm wrapping up this discussion on
simulated dying, I wanted to share a
final thought. Recently, I was at a
symposium where the artist P staff was
speaking with the psychoanalyst Jameson
Webster about the difference between
death and dying.
Alongside their art practice, PE is a
death doula. So, they spend a lot of
their time stewarding lives between
these states. P described death as a
physical sessation of life, an ending
event. Whereas dying is the process of
transitioning towards death, something
that all of us are doing all the time to
greater or lesser degrees.
P's thoughts on dying and its
necessarily in meshed relationship to
living got me thinking again about one
of my favorite ideas in queer game
studies, permal life.
Permalife is an idea conceived by Bo
Rubberg as a kind of queer
counterargument to the hyper maskcoded
logics of perma death gaming. Perma
death gaming or hardcore gaming is a
game mode where you lose everything if
you die. Think back to those early
arcade games I was talking about.
Perma death isn't to be infallible or a
small god. It's actually about existing
so close to the condition of death that
one's fear of failure cleaves away from
its source and some other kind of
feeling can bubble up to the surface.
In permal life games, death is all
around us. And yet this can this
condition paradoxically necessitates a
kind of persistence.
Maybe like B says, death is actually the
easy way out. The hardest thing as the
queer subject or any marginalized
subject is to continue existing in a
world that would rather scrub you out.
Permalife games often induce very
complex or contradictory ways of being.
The border between life and death,
failure and persistence, beginning and
ending becomes extremely blurry.
It's these kinds of narratives that stay
with me after I put down the controller
and these kinds of games I try to create
in my work.
Thanks for listening. Thank you for gay
area to convening and I'm excited to
have you play Small Void.